.. Security:

BIND 9 Security Considerations
==============================

.. _Access_Control_Lists:

Access Control Lists
--------------------

Access Control Lists (ACLs) are address match lists that you can set up
and nickname for future use in ``allow-notify``, ``allow-query``,
``allow-query-on``, ``allow-recursion``, ``blackhole``,
``allow-transfer``, ``match-clients``, etc.

Using ACLs allows you to have finer control over who can access your
name server, without cluttering up your config files with huge lists of
IP addresses.

It is a *good idea* to use ACLs, and to control access to your server.
Limiting access to your server by outside parties can help prevent
spoofing and denial of service (DoS) attacks against your server.

ACLs match clients on the basis of up to three characteristics: 1) The
client's IP address; 2) the TSIG or SIG(0) key that was used to sign the
request, if any; and 3) an address prefix encoded in an EDNS Client
Subnet option, if any.

Here is an example of ACLs based on client addresses:

::

   // Set up an ACL named "bogusnets" that will block
   // RFC1918 space and some reserved space, which is
   // commonly used in spoofing attacks.
   acl bogusnets {
       0.0.0.0/8;  192.0.2.0/24; 224.0.0.0/3;
       10.0.0.0/8; 172.16.0.0/12; 192.168.0.0/16;
   };

   // Set up an ACL called our-nets. Replace this with the
   // real IP numbers.
   acl our-nets { x.x.x.x/24; x.x.x.x/21; };
   options {
     ...
     ...
     allow-query { our-nets; };
     allow-recursion { our-nets; };
     ...
     blackhole { bogusnets; };
     ...
   };

   zone "example.com" {
     type master;
     file "m/example.com";
     allow-query { any; };
   };

This allows authoritative queries for "example.com" from any address,
but recursive queries only from the networks specified in "our-nets",
and no queries at all from the networks specified in "bogusnets".

In addition to network addresses and prefixes, which are matched against
the source address of the DNS request, ACLs may include ``key``
elements, which specify the name of a TSIG or SIG(0) key.

When BIND 9 is built with GeoIP support, ACLs can also be used for
geographic access restrictions. This is done by specifying an ACL
element of the form: ``geoip db database field value``

The field indicates which field to search for a match. Available fields
are "country", "region", "city", "continent", "postal" (postal code),
"metro" (metro code), "area" (area code), "tz" (timezone), "isp", "org",
"asnum", "domain" and "netspeed".

value is the value to search for within the database. A string may be
quoted if it contains spaces or other special characters. If this is an
"asnum" search, then the leading "ASNNNN" string can be used, otherwise
the full description must be used (e.g. "ASNNNN Example Company Name").
If this is a "country" search and the string is two characters long,
then it must be a standard ISO-3166-1 two-letter country code, and if it
is three characters long then it must be an ISO-3166-1 three-letter
country code; otherwise it is the full name of the country. Similarly,
if this is a "region" search and the string is two characters long, then
it must be a standard two-letter state or province abbreviation;
otherwise it is the full name of the state or province.

The database field indicates which GeoIP database to search for a match.
In most cases this is unnecessary, because most search fields can only
be found in a single database. However, searches for country can be
answered from the "city", "region", or "country" databases, and searches
for region (i.e., state or province) can be answered from the "city" or
"region" databases. For these search types, specifying a database will
force the query to be answered from that database and no other. If
database is not specified, then these queries will be answered from the
"city", database if it is installed, or the "region" database if it is
installed, or the "country" database, in that order.

Some example GeoIP ACLs:

::

   geoip country US;
   geoip country JAP;
   geoip db country country Canada;
   geoip db region region WA;
   geoip city "San Francisco";
   geoip region Oklahoma;
   geoip postal 95062;
   geoip tz "America/Los_Angeles";
   geoip org "Internet Systems Consortium";

ACLs use a "first-match" logic rather than "best-match": if an address
prefix matches an ACL element, then that ACL is considered to have
matched even if a later element would have matched more specifically.
For example, the ACL ``{ 10/8; !10.0.0.1; }`` would actually match a
query from 10.0.0.1, because the first element indicated that the query
should be accepted, and the second element is ignored.

When using "nested" ACLs (that is, ACLs included or referenced within
other ACLs), a negative match of a nested ACL will the containing ACL to
continue looking for matches. This enables complex ACLs to be
constructed, in which multiple client characteristics can be checked at
the same time. For example, to construct an ACL which allows queries
only when it originates from a particular network *and* only when it is
signed with a particular key, use:

::

   allow-query { !{ !10/8; any; }; key example; };

Within the nested ACL, any address that is *not* in the 10/8 network
prefix will be rejected, and this will terminate processing of the ACL.
Any address that *is* in the 10/8 network prefix will be accepted, but
this causes a negative match of the nested ACL, so the containing ACL
continues processing. The query will then be accepted if it is signed by
the key "example", and rejected otherwise. The ACL, then, will only
matches when *both* conditions are true.

.. _chroot_and_setuid:

``Chroot`` and ``Setuid``
-------------------------

On UNIX servers, it is possible to run BIND in a *chrooted* environment
(using the ``chroot()`` function) by specifying the ``-t`` option for
``named``. This can help improve system security by placing BIND in a
"sandbox", which will limit the damage done if a server is compromised.

Another useful feature in the UNIX version of BIND is the ability to run
the daemon as an unprivileged user ( ``-u`` user ). We suggest running
as an unprivileged user when using the ``chroot`` feature.

Here is an example command line to load BIND in a ``chroot`` sandbox,
``/var/named``, and to run ``named`` ``setuid`` to user 202:

``/usr/local/sbin/named -u 202 -t /var/named``

.. _chroot:

The ``chroot`` Environment
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

In order for a ``chroot`` environment to work properly in a particular
directory (for example, ``/var/named``), you will need to set up an
environment that includes everything BIND needs to run. From BIND's
point of view, ``/var/named`` is the root of the filesystem. You will
need to adjust the values of options like ``directory`` and ``pid-file``
to account for this.

Unlike with earlier versions of BIND, you typically will *not* need to
compile ``named`` statically nor install shared libraries under the new
root. However, depending on your operating system, you may need to set
up things like ``/dev/zero``, ``/dev/random``, ``/dev/log``, and
``/etc/localtime``.

.. _setuid:

Using the ``setuid`` Function
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Prior to running the ``named`` daemon, use the ``touch`` utility (to
change file access and modification times) or the ``chown`` utility (to
set the user id and/or group id) on files to which you want BIND to
write.

   **Note**

   If the ``named`` daemon is running as an unprivileged user, it will
   not be able to bind to new restricted ports if the server is
   reloaded.

.. _dynamic_update_security:

Dynamic Update Security
-----------------------

Access to the dynamic update facility should be strictly limited. In
earlier versions of BIND, the only way to do this was based on the IP
address of the host requesting the update, by listing an IP address or
network prefix in the ``allow-update`` zone option. This method is
insecure since the source address of the update UDP packet is easily
forged. Also note that if the IP addresses allowed by the
``allow-update`` option include the address of a slave server which
performs forwarding of dynamic updates, the master can be trivially
attacked by sending the update to the slave, which will forward it to
the master with its own source IP address causing the master to approve
it without question.

For these reasons, we strongly recommend that updates be
cryptographically authenticated by means of transaction signatures
(TSIG). That is, the ``allow-update`` option should list only TSIG key
names, not IP addresses or network prefixes. Alternatively, the new
``update-policy`` option can be used.

Some sites choose to keep all dynamically-updated DNS data in a
subdomain and delegate that subdomain to a separate zone. This way, the
top-level zone containing critical data such as the IP addresses of
public web and mail servers need not allow dynamic update at all.

